Experiencies with Mobile and Ubiquitous Learning in a Computer Enginnering Course
Jorge L.V. Barbosa, Rodrigo M. Hahn, Solon A. Rabello, Débora N.F. Barbosa, William Segatto
Abstract-This paper details our experiences using mobile and ubiquitous computing technology to support and improve learning in a new kind of academic structure, called Undergraduate Program of Reference (GRefe). The GRefe was proposed in Unisinos, a southern brazilian university. Currently, there are six GRefes. The courses are structured into Learning Programs and Learning Projects, and follow a practical, multidisciplinary approach. We proposed the use of mobile and ubiquitous computing to articulate and improve the academic activities of a specific GRefe called Computer Engineering. We believe that the GRefe approach simplifies and stimulates the use of this technology in a learning environment.
Index Terms-K3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer and Information Science Education - computer science education, information systems education. 
xxxx-xxxx/0x/$xx.00 (c) 2009 IEEE
----------   ?   ----------
1	INTRODUCTION
N
OWADAYS, studies about mobility in distributed systems are being stimulated by the proliferation of portable electronic devices (for example, cell phones, handheld computers, tablet PCs and notebooks) and the use of new interconnection technologies based on wireless communication (like WiMAX, WiFi and bluetooth). This new mobile and distributed paradigm is called Mobile Computing [1], [2]. Moreover, mobility allied with the diffusion of wireless communication enabled the availability of computational services in specific contexts - Context-aware Computing [3], [4]. Adaptation related research brought the possibility of continuous computational support, anytime, anywhere - Ubiquitous Computing (defined and thoroughly discussed in the works of Weiser [5] and Satyanarayanan [6]). In turn, Location Systems [7], [8] are enabling the use of this kind of computing in accordance with the physical location of users. Recently, the application of these technologies in the improvement of education strategies created a new research front called Mobile and Ubiquitous Learning. This concept is deeply discussed in the works of Barbosa et al. [9], [10], Ogata and Yano [11], Rogers et al. [12] and Yau et al. [13]. 
   In 2002, Unisinos (a southern brazilian university) has proposed a new pedagogical approach to undergraduate courses. This approach is called Undergraduate Course of Reference (nicknamed GRefe). GRefes are based on: 1) Learning Programs: a new kind of academic structure oriented to stimulate the integration between the course's knowledge areas; 2) Learning Projects: a long duration activity used to amalgamate the knowledge created in the different knowledge areas. 
   Currently, there are six GRefes in our university. In this paper, we describe our experience in applying the mobile and ubiquitous computing technology to improve the academic practices of professors in a specific course of reference, called Computer Engineering GRefe (nicknamed ComGRefe). We also describe a pilot program in the area of ubiquitous learning. LOCAL is an architecture geared for location and context-aware learning support. It was created in order to support specific instances of ubiquitous learning in small-scale learning environments.
----------------
* Jorge L.V. Barbosa, Rodrigo M. Hahn, Solon A.Rabello & Wilian Segatto are with the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos - UNISINOS, Săo Leopoldo - RS, Brazil, PO Box 93022-000. E-mail: jbarbosa@unisinos.br, rodrigo.hahn@gmail.com, solon.rabello@gmail.com,segatto.w@gmail.com
* Debora Nice Ferrari Barbosa is with UniLasalle, Canoas - RS, Brazil, PO Box 92100-000. E-mail: nice@unilasalle.edu.br.
Manuscript received (6/1/2009). Please note that all acknowledgments should be placed at the end of the paper, before the bibliography.
   This work is organized in eight sections. Section two discusses concepts and definitions related to mobility, location and education. Section three presents the Computer Engineering course (ComGRefe). Section four describes our infrastructure and the scenario of our experiments. Sections five and six detail the application of mobile computing resources in ComGrefe. In particular, section five discusses their general application in each knowledge area, while section six describes their application in two specific learning projects: 1) a pervasive game that leverages mobile devices in order to teach the player concepts related to a specific domain, presenting a rich learning experience, and; 2) the construction of mobile robots of several types, some of which are pitted against one another in a sport called robot sumo. The focus of both sections is the use of mobile computing to support a new way of teaching. The seventh section describes a small-scale, ubiquitous learning architecture called LOCAL, that employs contextual information and user profiles in order to support ubiquitous learning. Practical results involving the ComGrefe are discussed. Section eight draws conclusions about the applicability of such methods/technologies in today's classrooms.
2    MOBILITY, LOCATION AND EDUCATION
Location [7], [8] is an important topic related to mobile and ubiquitous computing [1], [5], [6]. This research front proposes the determination of mobile devices' physical location (for example, a room in a building, or a specific address in a street). This information can be obtained through satellite positioning (GPS, A-GPS) and through wireless antennas (CDMA, GSM and Wifi). The precision obtainable today allows the implementation of practical applications [8].  Moreover, the proliferation of wireless hotspots suggests that in the future, this precision will only grow, giving way to more sofisticated location based services (LBS) [14]. 
   The effectiveness of satellite-based location technology is greatly reduced in urban environments. Location technology would be considerably more useful would it be continuous, anytime, anywhere [8]. Consequently, new alternatives to the use of satellites are appearing, like integration between GPS and mobile telephony (A-GPS) and positioning based on wireless antennas (WiFi, cell phones or both). Based on these studies, we can imagine a medium term scenario where society would be permeated with mobile devices, always connected to a communication network and with precise location data always available. In this scenario, ubiquitous computing will surely be stimulated, as a precise location method will always be available. 
   The dissemination of ubiquitous computing will significantly impact society in several areas. Between these areas, one of the most prominent ones is Education (Ubiquitous Learning [10], [12]). In this scenario, where education is backed up by ubiquitous computing, a new educational model should arise, since pedagogical resources would be accessible anytime, anywhere. 
   Ubiquitous support allows the construction of learning programs related to dynamic information obtainable from the learners' physical context. The environment controls education-related applications, making possible establishing links between contexts and pedagogical goals. Education, in this scenario, is dynamic, and educational resources are distributed in contexts. Based on the learner's goals and physical context, the system could message the user, with interventions such as "a person/device/resource related to a specific goal of yours is now available". Towards this scenario, several approaches are being researched, like GlobalEdu [9], Japelas [11] and SmartClassroom [13]. 
3	COMPUTER ENGINEERING COURSE
Undergraduate Course of Reference (nicknamed GRefe) is a new kind of academic approach, based on Learning Programs. Each Learning Program area has a professor and is composed of a group of activities used to teach. These activities can be thematic workshops, lectures, experiments using the laboratories and standard classes. For example, at our university there is a Computer Engineering GRefe (nicknamed ComGRefe). The ComGRefe is one of six GRefes created by our university during the past years. This GRefe is organized in four Learning Programs, namely: 1) Bases, 2) Methods, 3) Challenges, 4) Solutions.
Each Learning Program has a period of one year and is divided into six knowledge areas: 1) Computer Science, 2) Electronics, 3) Physics, 4) Mathematics, 5) Linguistics and 6) Philosophy.
   Each Learning Program has a special kind of activity called Learning Project. Learning Projects are the main activities because they integrate all areas in a practical framework, where all professors and students participate. For example, two projects currently in development can be underlined: 1) the construction of mobile robots, 2) the creation of pervasive games. Both projects are using handhelds, tablet PCs and wireless technology. Other interesting characteristics of ComGRefe are: 
1. There are approximately 20 students and 6 professors by Learning Program. This gives a total of about 80 students and 24 professors involved in the course. 
2. Each student has an appointed tutor - a professor that advises all of his/her pedagogical activities during the program.
3. Each Learning Program conducts periodic meetings where the professors of each knowledge area tell about their experience. In the same meeting, each Learning Project coordinator tells about the evolution of project activities. 
   ComGrefe is the first community in our university to use mobile computing in academic routine practices. It is a pilot project. After we gather more experience, other GRefes will be integrated. 
4	INFRASTRUCTURE AND SCENARIO
In 2004, Unisinos has created the Mobile Computing Lab (MobiLab [15]), a specific laboratory to research the mobile and ubiquitous computing. MobiLab is supporting the experiences conducted in the ComGRefe. Great part of our resources was donated by the HP Computers through the award HP Mobile Technology for Teaching Grant - Latin American Region received by the laboratory in 2004 [16], [17]. Currently, our infrastructure is as follows:
1. 45 HP iPAQ hx4700 pocket PCs. This model is powered by an Intel XScale PXA270 624Mhz CPU. It has 64MB RAM and 128MB ROM. The device also has a VGA display, and integrated WLAN, Bluetooth 1.2 and IrDA. All pocket PCs come with 256 MB SD memory cards. The devices weigh very little, and are ideal for outdoor lessons.
2. 20 HP TC1100 tablet PCs. They are powered by an Intel Pentium M 1.00Ghz processor, and have 512MB RAM and a 40GB hard drive. The screen is a 10.4" XGA (1024x768) TFT display. It has an integrated 32MB nVidia G-Force4 Go 420 and HP Wlan 802.11a. The device runs Windows XP Tablet PC Edition. The differentiated input method allows the operation of the device with a digital pen, instead of the keyboard. Also, the form factor, battery life (two and a half hours) and integrated WiFi offer a more mobile way of interaction than standard notebooks.
3. 14 docking stations for the TC1100 tablet PC. They have 3 extra USB ports, 1 externally accessible multi-bay (for plugging a CD-ROM drive, for example), a VGA connector and wired network. The dock stations save the time of having to plug the tablet accessories when returning to a more traditional classroom environment.
4. 4 Cisco Aironet 1100 wireless access points. They have 16 MB RAM, 8MB flash memory, 54Mbps transmission speed, and support both 802.11g and 802.11b clients. The circa 200 meters coverage radius enables us to easily deploy mobile devices all over ComGrefe, without significant loss of signal.
5. 4 smartphones with GPS (two Nokia N95, one HTC Touch HD and one HTC Kayser P4550).
   Our scenario encloses nine rooms, covered by four wireless access points (see Fig. 1). This coverage is needed for our location technology research, where we use the access points for WiFi signal triangulation. With the mobile and ubiquitous computing support in ComGrefe, we are looking for two main pedagogical goals. First of all, we are interested in supporting the specific activities of each knowledge area. As for the second goal, we are interested in applying wireless and mobile technology in the improvement of our Learning Projects.
   In order to satisfy the first objective, professors of the four ComGRefe Learning Programs are being stimulated to use tablet PCs and iPAQs in their daily practices. With motivated teachers, this new way of learning becomes quicker to accept and easier to adapt to. Section five describes the application of computing in each knowledge area. 
   To satisfy our second objective, we have introduced mobile computing in several Learning Projects, for example: 
1. Use of access points, iPAQs and tablet PCs to create several kinds of mobile robots (see Fig. 2a and 2b).
2. Use of mobile computing to automate residences and industries (controlling doors, video cameras and energy consumption).
3. Integration between mobile technology and RFIDs to automate parking control
4. Use of wireless technology to determine physical location and to explore location based services; 
5. Use of iPAQs, tablet PCs and RFIDs in the development of multiplayer and pervasive games (see Fig. 2c and 2d). 
   Section six details two specific learning projects developed in this context. 
   
(a) Creation of mobile robots(b) Remote control of a 
mobile robot
Fig. 1. ComGRefe (dashed in the picture) 
(c) Use of mobile devices in pervasive gaming(d) Players of pervasive games during a matchFig. 2. Mobile Computing in Learning Projects 
5	MOBILE COMPUTING IN THE KNOWLEDGE AREAS
In this section we aim to present an objective review of the impact of using mobile computing technology in ComGRefe. In order to do this, we have consulted professors involved in all of the different knowledge areas. We are interested in the evaluation of mobile computing applications for teaching in each area. The results were the following: 
1. Computing Area: students of this area are using mobile computing in several projects. For example, many applications developed in Java and Embedded C++ are being deployed to the pocket PCs for testing, instead of using the emulators provided in the SDKs. This provides a more accurate debugging experience. The mobile computing infrastructure is also used in the creation of distributed applications, using several pocket PCs connected via WiFi and/or Bluetooth. Network programming concepts (such as client/server architectures and sockets) are being explored, and different Operating Systems are being deployed to the pocket PCs.
2. Electronics Area: in this area, many applications were found for the mobile devices. In laboratory activities, for example, pocket PCs are being used to navigate electronic component catalogues, consult electronic circuit schematics, update of implementation schemes and use of photos/films of prototypes in development. In classroom activities, students use pocket PCs for real-time projection and discussion of solutions (see Fig. 3a).
3. Physics Area: this area found a wide range of utilities for the mobile devices. For example, sensors can be connected to a mobile device. This provides learners with mobile systems adapted to a remote data collection scheme. These sensors can be used both in and out of the classroom. In the classroom, a student lab station usually consists of a tablet PC or a pocket PC, a sensor and a LabPro interface (or other A/D converter). When outside the classroom, a pocket PC device connected to a sensor and an A/D converter provides the necessary equipment for collecting sample data anywhere.
4. Mathematics Area: in this area, mobile devices are mostly being used to access mathematics software via web. The mobile devices are also used in a support role - students are introducing computational vision to the robots used in other learning projects.
5. Linguistic Area: in this area, devices are being used mainly for convenience. The mobile devices way of interaction allows taking quick notes anywhere, be text or voice recordings. Many tasks benefit from this added convenience, such as recording oral practices (dialogues and speeches), communicating in different languages and accessing dictionaries, writing content for personal homepages, practicing the English grammar, chatting with chatbots [18] and playing language games [19]. Fig. 3b shows a thematic workshop in linguistic area using tablet PCs.
6. Philosophy Area: in this area, as in the linguistics area, mobile devices are being used mostly for convenience. With tablet PCs, learners can use digital libraries to access online e-books, and maintain a site created by the course [20]. The social impacts of mobile computing are also being researched. Some aspects of these impacts can be measured in groups, like the learning programs in ComGRefe. 
(a) Electronics workshop(b) Linguistics workshopFig. 3. Mobile equipment being used in thematic workshops 

6	MOBILE COMPUTING IN THE LEARNING PROJECTS
The following sections present two Learning Projects conducted in ComGRefe. The first is an innovative pervasive game for the teaching of biology (specifically, epidemics and disease control), and focuses on player interaction to achieve a common goal. The game utilizes location tracking and was planned to be very forgiving about the necessary technologies, that is, it can be set up with the minimum of a WiFi network and wireless-enabled devices. The second project describes the building of mobile robots controlled via wireless cameras and computational vision.
6.1	moBIO Threat: Pervasive Gaming in ComGRefe
Pervasive gaming is an emerging genre of gaming, in which players must physically move to specific places in order to perform tasks within the game. Users must interact with each other and with the environment around them. To accomplish such interactions, location technologies can be used to allow learners to interact with real objects. It is also a challenging domain, because it deals with networking protocols, game design, game planning, social interaction and collaboration. But the most notable aspect of a pervasive game is, undoubtedly, the social interaction and collaboration. 
   There are a few pervasive games already developed, such as CatchBob! [21], Uncle Roy All Around You [22], Human PacMan [23], [24] and, most recently, Plundr [25].
   The main goal of the moBIO Threat Learning Project was to create, an innovative game with improved gaming experience on both interaction and location tracking domains. The game is meant to be an educative experience - it is main goal being to teach learners about epidemics and disease control while they play. During the game, the players have to work with pathological agents and chemical reactions for them, for example. In other words, players must gather information about game elements by learning how domain-specific subjects work.
   The areas of Chemistry and Biology are the most utilized on the game educational objectives. moBIO Threat features a completely different gameplay from what people are used to. Many times, during the game, players must look for specific objects or places. They have to walk and explore the game area to gather resources, which are always real objects. This way, users can interact with the game elements (such as trees and rooms) in a concrete way. 
6.1.1	Game Plot & Features
The game can be played by up to eight players. It takes place right after a terrorist attack in a university. Most of the facilities were destroyed, and the communication with the rest of the world has been lost. The terrorists (TR) stole ten years of research data from the local biology lab. Their goal is to use the research data to develop a deadly toxin and launch a missile to disseminate it. A team of military scientists - dubbed as counter-terrorists (CT) - remained in the university. The CT mission is to prevent the enemy from achieving a pathological agent from the stolen research data. This can be done by either neutralizing the enemy force or by synthesizing an antidote for the agent being developed. 
   As they interact with objects or other players, their position on the game map is being updated, so players can know where the team players are. The game provides, automatically, virtual feedback for actions being taken on the real world, such as walking or interacting with objects. Players can see in the map the trees where the needed agents can be collected (either to make an antidote or to create a pathological agent).
   Fig. 4 shows players at a moBIO Threat match. During the match, players can activate the enemy search button, which triggers a scan for players nearby and creates a combat opportunity if at least one of them is found. The battle is fought based on items the player collects or buys in a structure named Armory. Since the team players have the same objectives, they are constantly talking to each other, setting up strategies and trading information about items and enemies. For this reason, there is a strong sense of collaboration between team players. There is also an enhanced competition sense, since enemies can be seen, followed and battled. 
6.1.2	Technology used in moBIO Threat
Location tracking is a very important aspect of the pervasive gaming area. There are a lot of tools that can help improving the accuracy of the tracking, such as multiple WiFi antennas and ultra-sound or radio-frequency sensors, to name some. The problem with this kind of tracking is that they demand complex installations and location training and they need, on most of the times, specific and relatively expensive hardware to be installed. The GPS system was also discarded because it does not cover indoor locations - a very desirable situation to the game.
   Since the project was designed to be portable, the methods of localization tracking were simplified; the change of position only is detected when the user interacts with objects and rooms, which are already mapped and registered. 
   Future works will give the players ability to set their current localization by clicking on the map. This way, players will be able to inform their location to the team players, facilitating the request for support or trade of items, for example. 
   Each player carries an HP TC1100 tablet PC. Players can detach the tablet PC removable keyboard after typing their names and login information, when the match is about to start. To ease input, players utilize the tablet PC pen to interact with the game software. 
   The game was developed in Java, conforming to the J2SE v5.0 libraries and specifications. Fig. 5a shows the game main screen. The game interface consists of four main sections.
(a) CT Attempting to Sinthesize an antidote(b) A terrorist searches for 
his opponentsFig. 4. Players at a moBIO Threat Match 
(a) Game main screen(b) WiFi coverage and access poin placementFig. 5. moBIO Threat
   The left column (Number 1 on the Fig. 5a) shows the player rank, the items being carried in the personal bag and the wanted items for the current mission. The lower left corner (Number 2) has information about the player, such as name, team and health. The health level is presented in a graphical percentage-based bar. The bottom of the screen (Number 3) has information about the events and warnings of the game and gives feedback about the status of the connected interaction devices, such as RFID and Bluetooth. The section also features a search-for-enemies button, which enables the scan for enemies to permit a combat between the players. The bigger section (Number 4) contains the map of the game area, which shows information about the location of friends, places and items in general. The localization of the game components on the map is updated when it is detected the change of their positions, utilizing a coordinate-based module. 
   WiFi is the main method of communication in the game, because the users are mostly always within the coverage range (shown in Fig. 5b). Events of localization and messaging are communicated through the WiFi connection. The players communicate with the server via IEEE 802.11 network. To provide maximum range and coverage, the access point was placed in the corner of the building marked "B" (pointed in the Fig. 5b) - the AP covers an area of about 7000 square meters. 
   The trees and the walls of buildings may cause players to eventually enter a "dead spot". This may cause the connection to terminate. However, a reconnection module was developed to guarantee reconnection as soon as the user leaves the "dead spot". When the signal is lost, the map becomes unavailable, and a static signal animation takes its place in the game client instead. This acts as a visual feedback to the player. 
   Bluetooth technology is employed to provide interaction between the players when they become physically close to each other. The Avetana library [26] was used to integrate the game software and the built-in bluetooth card. The game also supports infrared technology. The tablet PCs have built-in IrDA ports, so no additional hardware is necessary. 
(a) Mobile robots(b) Manipulative robot (ROBIX)(c) Sofisticated, line-following robot(d) Combining the two approaches: Robotic ForkliftsFig. 7. Examples of robots developed and built in ComGRefe 
   RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) is another technology present on moBIO Threat. RFID tags are implanted in egame objects such as trees and rooms. To read the tags, players must be carrying a USB RFID reader, and place it close to the tag. The RFID reader used was the Texas S4100 MFR (Multi-Function Reader) Evaluation kit. Plastic tags were used, as shown in Fig. 6a. The tags are passive, so the reader must be very close. Fig. 6b shows the main goals CT players should pursue in order to thwart the terrorists plans (by synthesizing an antidote to the biological agent).
   The item module that supports all of the technologies is still under development, but its final form will be a box-shaped hardware component with: a QR Code tag on the outside; a RFID tag inside it with a indicative marker of its position on the outside; and a embedded IrDA module and battery with the infrared LED partially outside and a indicative marker of the LED position. The alphanumeric code for typing is printed together with the QR Code tag.
   When an item is detected, its hardware components activate the listeners on the game software. The identification numbers are obtained, and the event message is transmitted to the server, which queries the database for the item that corresponds to the unique code sent. The item is then dispatched to the client, and a confirmation screen appears, as can be seen on Fig. 6c and 6d, where the message "Do you want to enter room 202?" is presented to the player. 

(a) RFID tag on a tree(b) Game goals on the map(c) RFID reading via tablet PC (d) Close-up view of game screenFig. 6. Mapping of elements and Interaction with rooms
6.2	Mobile Robots in ComGRefe
In ComGRefe, Robotics is conducted as a multidisciplinary research area - the creation of mobile robots allows for great interaction opportunities. For this Learning Project, there are two main areas. For mobile robots, the goal is to develop robots capable of sensing the environment and moving through it, avoiding obstacles. This is achieved by equipping the robots with devices such as sensors, mobile computers and cameras. For manipulative robots, the goal is to create fixed-base robots with the capability to manipulate objects - such as robotic arms. In this section, we chose to name both kinds of robots as mobile robots, for simplicity purposes. The following two subsections detail experiments conducted in the area of mobile robots. These experiments are presented in order to show the pedagogical impact of the application of mobile technology in our Learning Programs. 
6.2.1	Mobile Robots Research
This Learning Project aims to integrate several knowledge areas by the way of a common practical project. Depending on the availability of resources, the robots can be either build with ready-made kits (such as Lego Mindstorms [27] and ROBIX [28]) or simulated in a virtual environment (such as SimRob3D [29]).
   Fig. 7a and 7b present examples of both mobile and manipulative robots, as developed in ComGRefe. Fig. 7a shows a mobile robot controlled via software. Two pocketPCs were used: one of them acts as the "mind" of the robot; the other acts as the control interface. The two pocketPCs communicate via bluetooth. Fig. 7b shows an example of a robotic arm. The arm control is powered by PC software, and acessed via parallel port interface. 
   In this Learning Project, the construction of mobile robots is divided into four incremental steps, as follows: 
1. Develop/build/model a simple mobile robot capable of basic movement, and use sensors to detect collisions.
2. Add more advanced sensor equipment to the robot. This presents exciting new possibilities, such as creating robots that can follow determined paths or using location technology, via WiFi, bluetooth, RFID or others. Fig. 7c presents an example of a line-following robot [30].
3. Add enhanced perception (computational vision) to the robot. With a wireless camera, the robot can see the environment, and is capable, for example, of actively avoiding collisions.
4. Equip the robot with tools (either software or new hardware parts) in order to allow it to perform more complex tasks (like finding heat sources, play soccer, identify and manipulate objects of a certain color, etc). These tasks, in general, should change the environment in some way. Fig. 7d presents experiences made in this Learning Project (in this case, the construction of small, battery-powered robotic forklifts).
   After each step, the new modules are integrated with previously developed ones. This way, learners build new features on top of a well-known, familiar structure. The incremental approach has been working exceptionally well in this Learning Project. After the robots are built, the learner's teams compete in small tournaments where the robots built by each are evaluated according to the knowledge areas involved. For instance, knowledge of concepts such as Euclidian geometry, programming logic, algorithms and matrixes all contribute to the development of electronic sensors. Due to our multidisciplinary approach, this mixed evaluation method has been giving satisfactory results. 
   Another interesting project regarding mobile robots can be seen in Fig. 8. R10D10 is a 1 meter high, 12kg heavy user-controlled robot, created with the goal of housing several types of sensors (such as wireless cameras, sonar and bumpers). Its design was inspired by the ubiquitous R2D2, of Star Wars fame. Its name stems from the fact that the number 2 is represented as 10 in binary notation. 
(a) R10D10 in GlobalTech'07(b) R10D10 Control InterfaceFig. 8. R10D10
   R10D10 is equipped with a graphical LCD (liquid crystal display) of 128x64 pixels and an integrated D-Link DCS-900W wireless camera (seen at the top of the robot, in Fig. 8a). The camera output is redirected to a video window in a tablet PC screen via wireless network. The operator can see what the robot sees, and respond with appropriate movements. 
   A preliminary working prototype of R10D10 was shown in GlobalTech 2007 (a big southern Brazilian technology event where many organizations present their recent research projects). It represented our Computer Engineering course. For this occasion, the robot was equipped with a 2,4GHz video link. R10D10 walked around, while its output was directly feed to a video projector. The robot can be controlled either via an adapted videogame joypad, or remotely, via wireless network (both WiFi and ad hoc). Fig. 8b shows the robot's control interface, running on a tablet PC.
6.2.2	Robot Sumo
Mobile robots were also used in another experiment in ComGRefe - Robot Sumo. In this particular research front, mobile computing devices were mostly used in supporting roles. For example, the micro-controllers employed in the robots were programmed in tablet PCs. Also, the sensors used for movement control, for example, were initially handled in test environments built around tablet PCs.
    In Robot Sumo, two robots are put in a circular arena, comprised of a black central area and delimited by a large white border. Fig. 9a shows a representation of the arena. The objective of a Robot Sumo match is to push the opponent away until it is out of the circle. The robot that remains inside the circle is declared the winner. The matches are usually disputed in best-of-three rounds. 
   The main challenges in such an application are the detection of the opponent's position and of the limits of the arena, and pushing the adversaries outside of the arena. The opponents and arena limits can usually be found via infrared sensors. This way, the robot knows which way to turn, and when to stop accelerating, in order not to leave the arena. The robots can move straight, in reverse, or turn. Different curved paths are achieved by varying the speed of the right or left wheels. 
(a) Representation of the arena(b) A sumobotFig. 9. Robot sumo    Fig. 9b presents a sumo-fighting robot (commonly called sumobot). The robots are constructed following specific rules regarding maximum size, maximum weight, structure and control. For example, the robot must be totally autonomous (it cannot communicate with external systems at all, be they humans or other machines), and must maintain structural rigidity (it is permitted to drop small pieces, but cannot drop large parts of itself outside the arena). Another rule enforced at this competition in ComGrefe is that Robot Sumo is not a war. The objective is to simply push the opponent outside the arena, and not to destroy it. As such, any weapons and projectiles that can cause damages to the robot systems, the arena and people are all forbidden.
7.	UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING IN COMGREFE
Since three years ago, the mobile computing lab at our university has been researching ubiquitous computing topics. One of our main goals was the creation of a ubiquitous learning model crafted specifically to offer support to small-scale environments, called LOCAL (Location and Context Aware Learning). LOCAL utilizes location and contextual information of learners to aid in the teaching and learning processes. The next sections present our model, describe practical results involving the ComGRefe and discuss related work in ubiquitous learning.
7.1	LOCAL
LOCAL is composed by seven subsystems (see Fig. 10): 
1. User profiles, which store information related to the learning process.
2. Personal assistant, which resides in the user's mobile device. 
3. Location system, used to determine the physical position of the mobile equipments.
4. Learning objects repository, which stores and indexes content related to the teaching process.

Fig. 11. Organization of learner profiles in LOCAL 
5. Tutor, an analysis engine capable of making inferences by using the data supplied by the profiles and the location system. 
6. Communication system, used to establish communication between the different parts of LOCAL, and between the system and its users.
7. Event system, used to schedule tasks. The following subsections describe these components in detail.
7.1.1	Learner Profiles
In the last few years, the search for standardization of user profiles has led to several research efforts like PAPI [31] and LIP [32]. In the scope of ubiquitous learning, profiles allow the exploration of resources based on characteristics of both the learner and the contexts in which he/she interacts. This is underlined in [9], [11], [33] and [34].



   The user profiles in LOCAL are based on the PAPI standard. Reasons behind this decision include: 1) flexibility - PAPI can be freely extended, and all of its components are optional; 2) modularity - profile fields and/or sections can be handled separately, allowing part of the profile to reside in the personal assistant, while another part is tied to the visited contexts. User profile data can be either persistent or contextual (see Fig. 11). 
   The persistent data (Contact, Preferences, Interests) is stored in the personal assistant, and it always accompanies the learner, no matter which context he/she is in. The contextual data (Relations, Performance, Security) is associated with the many contexts in which the learner interacts. LOCAL manages both kinds of data, seeking for pedagogical opportunities. 
   Contact stores basic user data, such as name, address, e-mail and phone number. The Preferences section helps the system customize the user experience, storing configuration data related to the preferred media type (audio, video and/or text), and others not directly related to pedagogical activities. Also, the learner might suffer from some kind of physical disability. In this case, according to specific disability scenarios, the system can provide the same content in different formats. For example, if the learners of a particular group are following a video tutorial, a transcript would be of particular use to people who are hard of hearing. 

Fig. 10. The LOCAL architecture 
   The Interests section follows the knowledge areas defined in the ACM Computing Classification System [35], having a general knowledge area (for example, "Math") and a specific interest topic, in the scope of said knowledge area (for example, "Group Theory"). The specific areas are then classified according to the apprentice's own goals (for example, "to learn" or "to teach"). Relations stores data which specifies relations between other users in the same context (for example, "student", "teacher" or "researcher"). Performance refers to proposed goals and evaluations conducted in a context. Security stores credentials (names and passwords) to allow for different access levels in specific contexts. 
7.1.2	Personal Assistant and Location System
The personal assistant (PA) is the module which accompanies the learner in its mobile device. It allows users to stay connected to the system, while providing a certain degree of independence. The PA presents the following functionalities: 
1. Authentication, keeping track of the learner's connection status.
2. Access to the location system, allowing for turning it off at will.

Fig. 13. Stimulating interaction between learners 
3. Receiving and storing notifications proceeding from the communication system.
   The location system used by the LOCAL is based on a generic architecture, supporting different methods of determining user's physical locations. The system ties physical location data to symbolic names (contexts). This allows real time mapping of mobile device positions. As the learner authorizes the location system in its PA, it begins to determine the device's position and physical context changes, along with the time and date of such changes. With this data, it is possible to completely track the learner's movements. User profile data, alongside context information, is used in the learning process. 
7.1.3	Learning Objects
Learning objects in LOCAL are made available to learners in accordance with whatever pedagogical opportunities may appear during their interaction with the different contexts (see Fig. 12). The location system keeps the tutor aware of which context the learner is in (step 1). The tutor uses this information, as well as the learner's profile data, to select the objects meeting the learner's goals and the context (steps 2 and 3). The objects meeting these criteria are then forwarded to the learner (step 4). This adaptive process can be started by two events: 1) when the learner enters a new context or 2) insertion of new material at the object repository. The metadata specification for Learning Objects in LOCAL was made in accordance with the IEEE LTSC [36]. The ample acceptance of this standard is underlined in [37].
7.1.4	Tutor
The tutor uses profile and location data to find learning opportunities. It can act in two ways: 1) sending learning objects (described in the last section) and 2) stimulating interaction between learners. It uses learner profile data to create bonds between learners (see Fig. 13). There are two interaction forms: 1) Similar interests: the tutor finds learners with similar interests in the same context, and stimulates interaction. This approach can be used in the creation of workgroups in a classroom, for example; 2) Complementary interests: the tutor finds learners with complementary interests. For example, a learner who wishes to learn more about a particular subject is paired along a user who wishes to teach or knows more about it. This way, the tutor can be used, for example, to create pairs of students who complement each other.
7.1.5	Communication System & Events
The communication system present in LOCAL is used to establish contact with learners, notifying them of new pedagogical opportunities. This system can be controlled automatically, or by an operator using the administrative interface. Users are contacted by textual notifications. The notifications are sent according to profiles, objects, location and event data. The following services are supported: 
1. Sending messages to a specific user in the system, wherever it is. 
2. Sending messages to a specific context (everyone in the context receives the notification).

Fig. 12. Learning objects management 
3. Sending messages to a user, but only if he/she is inside a particular context.

Fig. 14. Communication System 
4. Sending messages to all users, regardless of context. 
   The messages also have an associated date of expiration, delimiting a time interval after which the message loses its validity. Fig. 14 shows an example of use for the communication system where, based on the location data (1) and user profiles (2A), the tutor contacts the learner (3). This can be used to presenting new pedagogical opportunities, for instance. The communication system also supports the creation of events. An event is characterized by a series of properties, including keywords, starting date and location. Events can be defined to a future date, in usual date format (yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss) and have an arbitrary duration. When a message is associated to an event, it is up to the tutor to find correspondences, and forward the messages at the appropriate time. 
TABLE 1
RELATION OF QUESTIONS
No.Q: "What was your evaluation of..."1...notifications about the disponibility of professors?2...notifications about events, based on location and your profile data?3...notification about the disponibility of physical resources?4...information about users related to your interests, at your location?5...the presentation of content related to events at your location?6...the usefulness of this system for teaching?7...the use of this system to determine your physical location?8...the stimulus to interaction between users in the same location?9...the possibility of using this system in daily activities?10...the possibility of using this system in the classroom?7.2	Practical Results
7.2.1	Prototype
The prototype scenario at our university encloses nine rooms, including the Mobile Computing Lab, covered by four wireless access points, as shown in Fig. 1. The location system has two parts: 1) a web service created in C#, which supplies generic location data, and, 2) a database which stores context information. The Personal Assistant was developed in C#, using the .NET Compact Framework. The assistant runs in iPAQs hx4700 and tablet PCs tc1100. It reads potency information from the four wireless access points and forwards it to the location system. The system uses this information to determine the position of the mobile device. The profile system was implemented using MySQL. Users fill in their contact information using an online tool made in PHP and AJAX technology. This tool can be accessed both in desktops and in mobile devices. The tutor and message system were also implemented as web services in C#.
7.2.2	Evaluation
(a) Context Data(b) Daily usage   Fig. 15. Survey evaluation results
A test was conducted with a sample consisting of 20 individuals, between learners and professors of a Computer Engineering course. This test was realized into five moments: each moment, a set of four individuals interacted with the system. The following steps were considered: 
1. Each participant was given an HP iPAQ hx4700 mobile device, which they used to authenticate into the system.
2. The participants then received suggestions to participate in one of two workshops (based into user profile data). 
3. The participants were notified whenever a professor they wanted to chat with was available. 
4. LOCAL searched for matches between participants' profiles, suggesting learning resources related to their interests. 
5. The users were instructed to go to the workshop rooms. LOCAL made available on the iPAQs the program of the chosen events (per user). 
   After following these steps, the users were asked to answer a survey, with questions relating to their experience with LOCAL. The questions had answers in a scale going from 1 (very weak) to 5 (excellent). An answer with the value 0 (zero) meant the user had no particular opinion about that feature. The relation of questions in the survey presented to participants is seen in Table 1. Several considerations can be made from the analysis of each question. In order to demonstrate this, we have chosen charts representative of the most important questions.
   The aspects of context-awareness proposed in LOCAL were analyzed through questions 1 through 7. There was special interest into the adequate presentation of content related to pedagogical events, and the use of the system to track user location. Fig. 15a presents the results of these questions, as answered by 20 test subjects. As can be seen, results indicate good acceptance in relation to contextual information. 
   The proposed daily use of the system as learning tool in the classroom, as well as interaction between users and contextual elements were analyzed through questions 8 to 10. These relate mostly to the usability of the system. The results in Fig. 15b indicate a good acceptance by the test subjects. Over 60% of those subjects considered the system good or excellent. 
   If we take into consideration the test was performed in a limited and controlled scenario, the 32% of people that considered the system satisfactory are also a good indication that this system is well fit for daily usage. It should be noted that, in this survey, adaptability aspects were not given a proper analysis. These aspects could be better analyzed if the test involved an heterogeneous sample of devices (desktop PCs, tablet PCs and iPAQs). 
7.3	Related Work
Japelas [11] is a system created with the objective of supporting learning of polite expressions in the Japanese language. The students, porting handheld PCs, are assisted in the identification of the correct polite expressions to be used in a context. Japelas uses both location technology and user profiles, but this approach is directed to a specific application, while LOCAL is a generic approach. 
Several works approach user profiles in distributed environments (SeLeNe [34], [37] and Elena [38]), but they don't make use of location technology. Others approach location technology (AmbientWood [12] and SmartClassroom [13]), but don't make use of user profiles. LOCAL proposes the conciliation between location technology and user profiles. 
   GlobalEdu [9] presents a global view of mobile computing technology applied to learning. Its distributed architecture is implemented through the ISAM middleware [2]. Differently, LOCAL does not depend on middleware architectures to work, since it implements all needed support by itself. 
8	CONCLUSION
We can underline several results related to mobile and ubiquitous computing in ComGRefe. Firstly, Learning Programs, as tools, were improved, because we are using more interesting methodologies based on mobile computing. The implied application of mobile technology itself gives us an edge in our pedagogical approach - all of the knowledge areas in ComGRefe benefit from mobile technology. Secondly, the Learning Projects themselves were improved too, because we oriented all activities to use mobile devices. Third, all professors are using mobile equipment to do their activities, stimulating the interaction between the several knowledge areas, using mobile computing like a tool to integrate the group.
   Another interesting result comes from our experience with the creation of pervasive games. This activity, while usually concentrating on recreational subjects, creates practical, viable learning opportunities. A byproduct of this activity is that the interaction between learners is also stimulated. Pervasive games still constitute a relatively new research area, and there's much still to explore. 
   Even if the impact of using mobile devices in our Learning Programs is already exciting, its use can still be expanded. The mobile computing experience acquired in activities pertaining to a specific knowledge area can be applied to all of them. Also, hardware is not the only way to improve learning aspects; the use of specialized software can vastly improve the use of mobile devices in several key areas. The pedagogical impact of such initiatives can be readily measured through the evolution of student's grades. This is an interesting future research topic.
   As it could be seen in the two Learning Projects shown, mobile computing infrastructure can be used to set up cheap, flexible and easy to use experimentation and learning environments. With the popularization of mobile and embedded computing devices, the prices tend to drop. This fact, allied to the innovation aspect of such research topics, guarantees that this field of experiment will become more and more popular. 
   Besides, the following results can be underlined in our experience with ubiquitous learning: 
1. Location technology stimulates the use of mobile devices as learning tools
2. LOCAL contains the basic modules to support small-scale context-aware learning, including a location system.
3. The prototype and initial results attest the usefulness and viability of our approach. The location system, by providing precise location data, is a key component of the contextualization process. As such, improvements to the location system mean that the whole system (and thus, the learner experience as well) will be improved.
   The results of the usability studies show that LOCAL could be used in real environments, though the initial approach of ubiquitous computing could use some improvements:
1. The pedagogical inferences made by the tutor could be improved.
2. A future expansion of the user profile system would support a more extensive handling of learner information.
3. New tests should be conducted to evaluate our approach using it as a learning tool in a long-term course.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank CNPq (the Brazilian Council for the Development of Science and Technology) for funding the research project "UbiCampus: a Model to Support the Ubiquitous Learning", of which this study is a part. Additionally, we would like to thank HP Computers for donating great part of mobile computing resources used in the experiments (HP Mobile Technology for Teaching Grant - Latin American Region - 2004).
REFERENCES
[1] M. Satyanarayanan. "Fundamental challenges in mobile computting", Proc. 15th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pp. 1-7, 1996, doi: 10.1145/248052.248053.
[2] I. Augustin, A.C. Yamin, J.L.V. Barbosa, and C.F.R Geyer, "ISAM: A Software Architecture for Adaptative and Distributed Mobile Applications", Proc. VII IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC '02), Messina, pp.333-339, 2002, doi: 10.1109/ISCC.2002.1021698.
[3] A. Dey, "Understanding and Using Context", Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4-7, Feb. 2001, doi: 10.1007/s007790170019.
[4] I. Augustin, A.C. Yamin, J.L.V Barbosa, L.C. Silva, R.A. Real, and C.F.R. Geyer, ISAM, Joing Context-awareness and Mobility to Building Pervasive Applications. Mobile Computing Handbook, CRC Press, pp. 73-94, 2004.
[5] M. Weiser. "The Computer for the 21st Century", Scientific America, vol. 265, no. 3, pp. 66-75, Sept. 1991.
[6] M. Satyanarayanan. "Pervasive Computing: Vision and Challenges", IEEE Personal Communications, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 10-17, 2001.
[7] J. Hightower, and G. Borriello, "Location Systems for Ubiquitous Computing", Computer, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 57-66, doi: 10.1109/2.940014.
[8] J. Hightower, A.J. LaMarca, and I.E. Smith, "Practical Lessons from Place Lab", IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 5, no. 3, pp.32-39, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2006.55.
[9] J.L.V. Barbosa, D.N.F. Barbosa, A.C. Yamin, I. Augustin, L.C. Silva, and C.F.R. Geyer, "Learning in a large-scale pervasive environment", Proc. 2nd IEEE International Workshop on Pervasive Learning (PerEl '06), pp. 226-230, 2006, doi: 10.1109/PERCOMW.2006.74. 
[10] J.L.V. Barbosa, R. Hahn, D.N.F. Barbosa, and C.F.R. Geyer, "Learning in Small and Large Ubiquitous Computing Environments", Proc. IEEE/IFIP International Conference On Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC '08), pp. 401-407, 2008, doi: 10.1109/EUC.2008.89.
[11] H. Ogata, and Y. Yano, "How Ubiquitous Computing can support language learning", Proc. of KEST, pp. 1-6, 2003. 
[12] Y. Rogers, S. Price, C. Randel, D.S. Fraser, M. Weal, and G. Fitzpatrick, "Ubi-learning Integrates Indoor and Outdoor Experiences", Communications of the ACM, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 55-59, January 2005, doi: 10.1145/1039539.1039570.
[13] S.S. Yau, S.K.S. Gupta, F. Karim, S.I. Ahamed, Y. Wang, and B. Wang, "Smart classroom: Enhancing Collaborative Learning Using Pervasive Computing Technology", ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition (ASEE '03), Nashville, Tennesee, June 2003. 
[14] MobileIN Technologies, "Location Based Services (LBS)",  http://www.mobilein.com/location_based_services.htm. 2009.
[15] MobiLab, "Mobile Computing Lab", http://www.inf.unisinos.br/~mobilab, 2009
[16] CoolUnisinos, "Mobile Computing unlocks New Way of learning", available at http://h20195.www2.hp.com/V2/GetPDF.aspx/4AA1-0437ENW.pdf, 2009.
[17] CoolUnisinos, "CoolUnisinos Projet",  http://www.cfkeep.org/html/snapshot.php?id=33109265876104, 2009.
[18] Alicebot, "Business community for chatbots launched", http://alicebot.org. 2009.
[19] 20q.net. "Neural net on the Internet", http://www.20q.net, 2009.
[20] C. Candido, "Digital Library of Philosophy", http://www.caosmose.net/bibliotecadigital, 2009.
[21] F. Girardin, "Pervasive Game Development Today", http://www.girardin.org/fabien/catchbob/pervasive. 2009.
[22] S. Benford, M. Flinthanm, A. Drozd, R. Anastasi, D. Rowland, N. Tandavanitj, M. Adams, J. Row-Farr, A. Oldroyd, and J. Sutton. "Uncle Roy all around you: Implicating the city in a location-based", Proc ACM Advanced Computer Entertainment (ACE '04), Singapore, July 2004.
[23] A.D. Cheok, S.W. Fong, K.H. Goh, X. Yang, W. Liu, and F. Farzbiz, "Human Pacman: a sensing-based mobile entertainment system with ubiquitous computing and tangible interaction", Proc 2nd Workshop on Network and System Support for Games, Redwood City, California, pp. 106-117, 2003, doi: 10.1145/963900.963911.
[24] W. Knight. "Human PacMan hits real city streets", http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=dn6689. 2009.
[25] Plundr. "Location-based Game", http://plundr.playareacode.com. 2009.
[26] Avetana. "Avetana JSR-82 implementation", http://www.avetana-gmbh.de/avetana-gmbh/produkte/jsr82.eng.xml. 2009.
[27] J. Knudsen, The Unofficial Guide to LEGO Mindstorms Robots, O'Reilly Press, 1999.
[28] Robix Rascal, "Robix Robotics for Classroom or Lab", http://www.robix.com, 2009.
[29] F.J. Heinen, and F.S. Osorio, "A Robust Hybrid Control Architecture for Autonomous Robots", Proc 2nd International Conference on Hybrid Intelligent Systems (HIS '02), Santiago, Chile,  2002.
[30] Y.D. Kwon, and J.S., Lee, "An obstacle avoidance algorithm for mobile robot: the improved weighted safety vector field method", Proc. 10th IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control, Monterrey, CA, pp. 441-446, 1995, doi: 10.1109/ISIC.1995.525096.
[31] PAPI - IEEE P1484.2/d7, "Draft Standard for Learning Technology - Public and Private Information for Learners", available at http://www.cen-ltso.net/Users/main.aspx?put=407, 2009.
[32] LIP - IMS, "Learner Information Package Specification", avalilable at http://www.imsglobal.org/profiles, 2009.
[33] C.P. Nivo, J. Marques, D.N.F. Barbosa, J.L.V. Barbosa, C.F.R. Geyer, and I. Augustin. "Context-Aware Model in an Ubiquitous Learning Environment", Proc. 3rd International Workshop on Pervasive Learning (PerEL '07), pp. 182-186, 2007, doi: 10.1109/PERCOMW.2007.30.
[34] SELENE, "Self e-Learning Networks", http://www.dcs.bbk.ac.uk/selene, 2009.
[35] ACM, "The 1998 ACM Computing Classification System", avalilable at http://www.acm.org/about/class/1998, 2009.
[36] IEEE/LTSC/LOM Learning Technology Standards Committee. "Draft Standard for Learning Object Metadata", available at http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/files, 2009.
[37] P. Rigaux, and N. Spyratos. "SeLeNe Report: Metadata Management and Learning Object Composition in a Self eLearning Network", avalilable at http://www.dcs.bbk.ac.uk/selene/reports/seleneLRI3.pdf, 2009.
[38] B. Simon, Z. Miklós, W. Nejdl, M. Sintek, and J. Salvachua, "Elena: A Mediation Infrastructure for Educational Services", Proc. of WWW Conference, Budapest, Hungary, 2003.

Jorge Luis Victória Barbosa received his BS degree in Electrical Engineering from the Catholic University of Pelotas, Brazil, in 1991. He obtained his MS and PhD degrees in Computer Science from the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil, in 1996 and 2002, respectively. Today he is a full professor at the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (Unisinos), Săo Leopoldo, Brazil. Additionly, he is a CNPq (the Brazilian Council for the Development of Science and Technology) researcher in Computer Science (scholarship for high productivity) and head of the Mobile Computing Laboratory (MobiLab/Unisinos). His research interests include parallel and distributed computing, mobile and ubiquitous computing, programming languages and mobile/ubiquitous learning. He is a member of the Brazilian Computer Society (SBC).

Rodrigo Machado Hahn received his BS degree in Information Systems at UNISINOS, Săo Leopoldo, Brazil. Nowadays, he works in the software development industry. He is a close collaborator in research projects at Mobilab. His research interests include ubiquitous computing and ubiquitous learning systems.

Solon Andrade Rabello Junior received his BS degree in Information Systems at UNISINOS, Săo Leopoldo, Brazil. Nowadays, he works in the software development industry. He is a close collaborator in research projects at Mobilab. His research interests include mobile and ubiquitous computing, more specifically, pervasive games.

Débora Nice Ferrari Barbosa received her BS degree in Information Systems from the Catholic University of Pelotas, Brazil, in 1997. She obtained her MS and PhD degrees in Computer Science from the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. She is a Professor at Unilasalle University, Canoas, Brazil. Her research interests include ubiquitous learning systems, distributed computing, multi-agent systems and artificial intelligence. She is also a member of the SBC.

Wilian Segatto is a student of the Computer Engineering course at UNISINOS, Sao Leopoldo, Brazil. His reseach areas include pervasive games development, interactive automation systems and remote management, among others.
2   even page	IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX,  VOL.  #,  NO.  #,  MMMMMMMM  1996

AUTHOR:  TITLE	odd page    3





IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES	first page   1



8   even page	IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES       

JORGE L. V. BARBOSA ET AL.:  EXPERIENCES WITH MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS LEARNING IN A COMPUTER ENGINNERING COURSE	odd page    9

